Extremal combinatorics is an area of discrete mathematics that studies questions of how large an object can be while still avoiding a certain pattern. For example, how many people can be at a party where no group of 4 people are mutual friends nor mutual strangers? Or, how many points can be placed in a grid so that no three are on a line? The first goal of this project is to solve basic classification questions in the theory of pattern avoiding 0-1 matrices, which studies the following type of question: how many 1s can one pack into a matrix consisting of 0s and 1s while still avoiding a certain fixed pattern of 1s? Historically, advances in pattern-avoiding 0-1 matrices have been applied to solve mathematical problems in geometry and graph theory. The second goal of this project is to redirect pattern-avoiding 0-1 matrix methods to solve prominent open problems in computer science, in particular, the analysis of certain data structures that for decades have resisted analysis by more conventional methods. The project will also include educational activities such as training graduate students and mentoring undergraduate/high school research projects in algorithms and data structures.<br/><br/>The basic classification question in 0-1 matrices is to characterize the set of patterns whose extremal function is linear, or several degrees of almost-linear, or a non-linear polynomial. The project will focus on the basic classification question, as well structural properties of patterns that lead to certain extremal functions. For example, the foremost open problem is to characterize the range of extremal functions allowed by an acyclic pattern, i.e., one that is the incidence matrix of an acyclic graph. One of the applied goals of the project is to resolve the dynamic optimality conjecture and its corollaries, which concerns the existence of a universally optimal dynamic binary search tree data structure. The basic method involves transcribing the behavior of a data structure as a 0-1 matrix avoiding certain patterns. The project will also aim to resolve prominent open problems in discrete geometry using pattern-avoiding 0-1 matrices, such as bounding the complexity of geometric arrangements in two dimensions.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This grant fosters excellence and promotes student engagement and participation at the 7th Annual Learning for Dynamics and Control (L4DC) Conference, an event fostering interdisciplinary research at the intersection of machine learning, dynamical systems, control theory, and reinforcement learning. L4DC is committed to expanding the boundaries of model-based design through the integration of massive real-time data, both temporal and spatial, prompting a necessary reevaluation of established disciplinary foundations. L4DC 2025 will feature an array of presentations, including keynote addresses, oral presentations, and poster sessions, with a special emphasis on contributions that bridge multiple research domains. By facilitating these intersections, the conference not only advances the scientific area but also fosters a vibrant community where students and seasoned researchers collaboratively push the frontiers of knowledge in dynamics and control.<br/><br/>The objective of this NSF-funded initiative is to substantially broaden student involvement in L4DC and enrich their academic and professional development, with a particular focus on students from underrepresented backgrounds. This grant will provide comprehensive support through several targeted initiatives. First, 25 to 40 travel grants will be offered to ensure broad student participation from across the country. These grants are aimed at students who might otherwise be unable to afford attendance, thus fostering a more inclusive academic environment. Additionally, the conference will host Industry Booths and facilitate networking events, providing critical career insights and networking opportunities that students can use to bridge the gap between their academic pursuits and future professional roles. By aligning with NSF's broader goals, this award supports the integration of education and research, preparing a new generation of researchers equipped to tackle emerging challenges at the crossroads of learning, dynamics, and control.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. The purpose of this project is to provide travel and accommodation support for participants based in the United States to attend the workshop "A Conference on the Geometry, Topology, and Dynamics of Infinite-Type Surfaces", which will take place at the Casa Matemática Oaxaca in Oaxaca, Mexico from the 22nd to 27th of June, 2025. The workshop aims to create a dynamic platform where both established and emerging researchers, specializing in infinite-type surfaces and related fields, can come together. This event's goal is twofold: first, to facilitate a comprehensive understanding of recent breakthroughs in the field, and second, to explore various avenues for future research and encourage future collaboration. Furthermore, enabling US-based scientists to attend this international meeting has two additional benefits: (1) Allowing for future long term collaborations with researchers outside of the US, and (2) Providing a means to disseminate research and results to the global mathematical community. <br/><br/>Infinite-type surfaces serve as a common thread connecting various areas of mathematics. An infinite-type surface is a two dimensional manifold with "infinitely much topology,'' e.g. the sphere with a Cantor set of points removed or a surface of infinite genus. They appear in the study of polygonal billiards, topological dynamics, as generic leaves of foliations on compact spaces, in the study of Thompson groups, or in 3-manifolds that fiber over the circle. More recently, there has been a significant surge in the study of mapping class groups associated with infinite-type surfaces, also known as big mapping class groups. These are topological groups exhibiting rich phenomenology. As automorphism groups of countable structures, often endowed with well-defined large-scale geometry, they also inhabit the intersection of geometric group theory, model theory, and descriptive set theory. While infinite-type surfaces possess this interdisciplinary nature, historically, only two workshops (in 2013 and 2019) have brought together experts from diverse fields sharing this common theme. Thus, the primary scientific objective of this workshop is to convene a diverse group of mathematicians to facilitate cross-pollination among the different areas converging on infinite-type surfaces. More information on this workshop can be found at: https://www.birs.ca/events/2025/5-day-workshops/25w5359.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Sociality provides advantages in defense and food resource acquisition, but the ecological landscape of gregarious species is complex and requires accessing and accruing social resources (e.g., allies, friends, and mates) that can impact fitness.  Studies that focus on gregarious primate species have revealed how social resources influence male interactions (e.g., male-male confrontations over hierarchy and mates), but little is known about female-female competition. This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the impact that female competition over males, and the social resources they provide, have in the reproductive success of a close human relative. The study informs the evolution of sociality among primates, provides educational opportunities, and creates pedagogical material.  <br/><br/>Studies show that competition for food resources influences female sociality and fitness outcomes, but little is known about the impact and prevalence of social resource competition. Although some non-human primate females have behavioral patterns that suggest they compete over males, who may provide protection and infant care, direct evidence is scarce. This project leverages long-term databases and integrates novel behavioral, demographic, and hormonal data to explore female social resource competition in habituated non-human primates. The study evaluates whether females use competitive behaviors (i.e., aggression and dominance) to monopolize males and receive social benefits from them. Additionally, glucocorticoids and reproductive hormones levels are measured to determine if they influence competitive behaviors in ways that limit or promote access to social resources. The study advances knowledge regarding the causes and consequences of female-female competition, as well as the social and physiological mechanisms through which such competition may influence survival and reproductive success in social animals.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is increasingly being used to produce metallic parts in a variety of high-value industries, such as the aerospace, biomedical, and automotive industries. However, LPBF manufactured parts are prone to shape distortion and excessive heat or stress build up due to uneven temperatures across the part during the printing process, leading to cracks or other defects. Prior research has shown that scan sequence (i.e., the order in which geometric features on the part are scanned by the laser) can help with homogenizing temperature distribution across a part, thus reducing distortion, overheating and excessive stress. However, scan sequence is currently determined based on trial-and-error or hands-on learning, leading to inconsistent and suboptimal results. This project supports a scientific investigation into an approach for optimally determining scan sequence using printing process models. The knowledge created through this investigation will enable 3D printing of complex metallic parts with fewer failed or defective prints, thus improving the economic viability of lLPBF. The research will enrich an outreach program that actively engages middle school students in Detroit and inspires them to pursue careers in STEM fields.<br/><br/>The main objective of the project is to mathematically, numerically, and experimentally uncover the relationships between optimal scan sequences, temperature distribution, distortion, and residual stress in laser powder bed fusion using physics-based and data-driven thermal or thermomechanical models. The impacts of optimal scan sequences on microstructure and other part quality metrics will also be investigated. These objectives will be achieved by: (1) incorporating advanced thermal effects into the determination of optimal scan sequences using data-driven models; (2) numerically investigating when optimal scan sequences generated using only thermal models do not adequately reduce distortion or residual stress; and (3) introducing thermomechanical effects into the determination of optimal scan sequences in cases where thermal models alone are deficient. The methods will be validated experimentally. Translation of knowledge from this project to application may accelerate broader industry adoption of additive manufacturing.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Coastal flooding in the Great Lakes region poses significant risks to communities, infrastructure and ecosystems due to fluctuating lake levels, heavy rainfall, and coastal erosion. These stressors that are expected to worsen with climate change are already overwhelming stormwater systems and damaging property. They will also disproportionately affect communities suffering from historical and ongoing socioeconomic disparities and environmental injustices. This project aims to enhance the resilience of Great Lakes coastal cities by co-producing climate information with city practitioners and community-based organizations (CBOs) that can support their decisions to better prevent, prepare and adapt to these stressors. This will be achieved by creating an online participatory tool that integrates climate, hydrological, spatial data and participatory GIS. This decision support tool (DST) called Participatory Urban Modeling and Climate Projections for Community-Driven FlOoding Resilience (PUMP-COR) will be developed with participants in two Great Lakes cities: Benton Harbor (MI) and Milwaukee (WI). It will allow participants to better understand and visualize their risks and make choices that can influence the implementation of solutions. By directly engaging CBOs and city practitioners, this project will broaden and diversify participation in both cities and cultivate more inclusive development decisions that can be generalized to other decisions and geographies.<br/><br/>Specifically, the project will: 1) explore the viability of integrating three existing modeling efforts (across climate, hydrological and spatial information) to inform decision-making that builds the resilience of households, communities, and cities to flooding risks; 2) organize focus groups with CBOs and city practitioners to better understand different definitions and perceptions of resilience, risk, equitable and just solutions, and to provide feedback to each other and to the research team about their preferences and aspirations for PUMP-COR; and 3) build a network of researchers, CBOs, city practitioners, professional associations, and regional organizations to engage in the co-production process for the ongoing project and for a future broader proposal based on what can be learned from the planning grant. This broader proposal and engagement with communities will focus on how online DSTs can increase the number of people, communities and cities using PUMP-COR to build resilience of coastal cities. The outcomes will include improved decision-making for flood resilience, enhanced community participation, and better climate information tailored to the needs of diverse decision-makers. This research will significantly contribute to the fields of climate modeling, participatory GIS, and the science of actionable knowledge, offering innovative solutions for climate adaptation and resilience.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. The IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) is the premier international conference on information theory, the scientific discipline that studies the mathematical foundations of efficient, reliable, and secure communications, e.g., for telephony, television, wireless, optical, and data storage systems. It has been promoted under the umbrella of the IEEE Information Theory Society (ITSoc) since 1954, originally every two years and annually since 2000. Recent editions of the ISIT have had around 1000 paper submissions with 600 papers accepted and 850 participants including 350 students who benefit from the excellent learning and networking opportunity that ISIT provides. This award supports the participation of US-based students in ISIT 2025, which will be held in Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 22?27, 2025. Participation at this conference will enhance the research experiences for students and provide increased opportunities for new collaborations.<br/><br/>Students form an integral part of the Information Theory community, and the IEEE ISIT continues to promote student participation through the ISIT Jack Kiel Wolf Best Student Paper Award, the creation of the ISIT tutorial series, and the Information Theory Society Student Committee. Students comprise about one-third of the participants at ISIT, and the travel funds offered through this award will support the attendance at the 2025 ISIT by students enrolled in a graduate or undergraduate program in the United States and whose papers have been accepted for presentation.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This project will advance the state of the art of humanoid robotics, towards a vision of collaborative partners performing physically demanding tasks alongside humans. A series of gears connects the arms and legs of the robot to the electric motors that act as ?muscles.? Conventionally the effect of these gears is to multiply the torque applied by the motor to the limbs by more than one hundred times, which is needed for standard low-torque, high-speed electric motors to meet the demands of robot tasks. However, this amplification creates a safety hazard, because the effect of external torques on the motor is reduced by the same amount, and therefore the motor does not ?feel? contact, such as with a human coworker. The development of ?quasi-direct-drive? motors requiring little or no torque amplification is a major advance in human-safe robots, but these new motors use power for static operations, like holding up a heavy weight, leading to low efficiency and reduced operating times. This project complements state-of-the-art electric motors with innovative spring mechanisms to generate steady or periodic actions with a minimum of added energy. These novel actuators will provide humanoid robots with new capabilities to safely work alongside humans, move naturally, react quickly to their environments, and operate for longer periods. These features will be experimentally demonstrated using a one-legged hopping robot. Potential societal benefits include better collaborative robots for manufacturing and logistics, and longer lasting and higher performing prostheses and orthoses. To inspire the next generation of roboticists, the project will offer hands-on STEM experience to 7th and 8th-grade students through the University of Michigan WISE GISE summer camp and will host lab tours to students from the Detroit area.<br/><br/>This project will establish a systematic framework for the design and control of humanoid robots with an energy-efficient compliant actuator, which combines a Quasi-Direct-Drive (QDD) motor and Unidirectional Parallel Spring (UPS). This unique combination allows robots to generate high torque with significantly less energy consumption and heat dissipation, without inhibiting the leg swing motions. Integrating QDD and UPS results in complex interaction between robot hardware and control, since the parallel spring introduces a coupling effect between neighboring robot links. The holistic design framework developed by this project will simultaneously optimize the mechanical and control parameters so that the controller can utilize rather than counteract the robot?s natural dynamics. By addressing key questions about scalable optimization and bridging the gap between simulation and the real world, the investigators aim to pave the way for humanoid robots with high power autonomy and agility, facilitating prolonged operation in remote areas. This project will answer the following research questions: (1) how to quantify the performance of humanoid robots with QDD motors and UPS, (2) how to simultaneously optimize hardware and control parameters for improved energy efficiency and agility, and (3) how to bridge the simulation-to-reality gap in humanoid control to achieve agile and efficient locomotion.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This award supports a study of time-dependent formation and evolution of a plasma generated using photoemission driven by ultrafast lasers.  Plasmas are often created through electrical breakdown of neutral gas to generate charged particles, but it is also possible to create a plasma by shining a laser on a metal surface causing electrons to be ejected by a process called photoemission.  Recent developments in ultrafast nano-optics have made it possible to create plasmas using photoemission that have specific properties in the spatial and velocity-distribution of the resulting electron population.  A better understanding of the fundamental physics of this process will be transformative for both basic scientific research and emerging applications, such as plasma based high speed electronics and microchips, plasma catalysis and processing, and robust ultrafast laser detectors. <br/><br/>The project will theoretically and numerically study how the plasma electrons evolve from a given anisotropic velocity distribution due to photoemission to a thermalized state. Plasmas with precise seeding offer a widely accessible laboratory platform to study fundamental plasma physics, such as the evolution of plasma waves and instabilities. In addition, by tailoring the photoemission pulse properties and repetition rate, the research explores a possible new way of direct normal glow plasma generation using photoemission, by skipping Paschen?s breakdown, which will help to eliminate circuit stress, reduce plasma contamination, and improve system reliability. Plasma generation and control using cheap, low intensity light sources will also be explored, with the help of plasmonic resonant enhanced photoemission. Furthermore, this research may enable a new paradigm of few-cycle laser characterization for carrier-envelope phase (CEP) sensitivity with significantly enhanced signal strength using plasmas. Sub-optical-cycle control of plasmas is also important to potentially transformative applications, such as precise electrification of chemical reactions, chip-scale plasma accelerators, ultrahigh speed plasma electronics, and ambient-condition testbeds for strong-field nano-optics.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY<br/><br/>This research project aims to develop next-generation lightweight metals, with a focus on aluminum alloys reinforced with nanoparticles.  These nanoparticles have sizes 1/1000 smaller than human hair, but when added to metals, they can strengthen metals so that less of the material is needed to provide structural integrity.  Such composite materials are critical for industries like aerospace and automotive due to reduced material and energy consumption.  A key challenge in manufacturing these composites is achieving a targeted distribution of nanoparticles during the casting (solidification) process.  For example, an uneven distribution of nanoparticles can lead to a weaker material.  The team is investigating the interactions between the nanoparticles and the solidifying metal to understand the mechanisms that influence particle distribution.  By using state-of-the-art experimental techniques and computational models, this work is identifying the processing conditions that ensure a desirable distribution of particles.  This research is expected to advance the science underlying metal processing by providing the insights needed to produce high-strength materials.  This work has broader implications for the manufacture of advanced materials with tailored properties via solidification and offers insights that could be applied to other types of materials.  Additionally, the project is training future engineers in cutting edge materials science and is engaging underrepresented groups in STEM fields through outreach programs.<br/><br/>TECHNICAL SUMMARY<br/><br/>The goal of this project is to address the fundamental mechanisms governing nanoparticle redistribution during solidification in metal-matrix nanocomposites (MMNCs).  Specifically, the focus is on aluminum alloys reinforced with nanoscale particles.  Achieving a controlled distribution of these particles is critical for realizing the desired mechanical properties such as strength, stiffness, and plasticity.  However, the kinetics of particle interaction with a moving solidification front ? whether particles are pushed or engulfed ? remain poorly understood due to limitations in existing models, which are often based on oversimplified assumptions.  This project combines five-dimensional (3D space, time, and composition resolved), synchrotron-based x-ray imaging with phase-field simulations to explore the dynamics of particle-front interactions.  The experimental data and models will guide the development of processing strategies that control particle distribution, leading to improved MMNC microstructures, for example, by manipulating external thermal fields and the size and shape of the specimen.  This work has broader implications for the manufacture of composite materials with tailored properties and offers insights that could be applied to a range of other systems, including immiscible alloys.  Additionally, the project is preparing the next generation of engineers through training in advanced experiments and simulations, while actively engaging underrepresented groups in STEM fields through outreach programs.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Thermal management is a major bottleneck in electronics cooling. Traditional techniques can no longer provide the necessary cooling. State-of-the-art devices use phase change (condensation and boiling), but this is limited by the direction and magnitude of gravity. The proposed concept overcomes this limitation by amplifying gravity using acoustic waves for improving heat transfer. The outcomes of the proposed work will make important contributions to basic science and benefit society by sustaining progress in the semiconductor industry. The project includes integrated education and outreach programs to motivate, inspire, and enrich the educational experience of K-12 students.<br/><br/>Using experiments and modeling, the goal of the research program is to develop a comprehensive framework to effectively manipulate droplets and bubbles during phase change for enhancing heat transfer rates for thermal management applications. By superposing gravity with an acoustic field, the research program aims to demonstrate unprecedented heat transfer rates in condensation and boiling. Using state-of-the-art thermal-fluidic experimental facility and theoretical and numerical modeling, the research program investigates the heat transfer rates in condensation and boiling with three principal objectives: 1) improving the heat transfer rate in dropwise condensation and the critical heat flux in pool boiling by superposing gravity with tunable radiation pressure of acoustic waves, 2) developing a theoretical framework and analytical model for acoustically enhanced condensation and boiling, and 3) implementing acoustic wave-assisted film-wise condensation. The proposed research is expected to advance basic science by producing new knowledge that enables beyond-gravity condensation and boiling. The work will benefit society by enabling forward progress in the semi-conductor industry by providing efficient cooling for the next-generation compact microelectronic devices. It also benefits space exploration studies in microgravity environments where condensation and boiling are practically impossible due to the absence of gravity.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This NSF-funded workshop is dedicated to understanding the complex systems of particles found in soil, mud, sand, and clay. These particles play a crucial role in addressing significant challenges such as climate change, agricultural productivity, and soil erosion. The workshop will take place from December 14-15, 2024, at the Carnegie Mellon University campus in Kigali, Rwanda, and will bring together researchers, policymakers, and students from both the United States and Africa.  The conference aims to allow the currently disconnected research communities from geosciences, materials science, nanoscale chemistry, and complex systems to build common knowledge, grow relationships and exchanges for further understanding and collaborations. By tackling fundamental scientific challenges and practical applications of geoparticle systems, the workshop will contribute to global sustainability, economic growth, and poverty alleviation in regions heavily affected by soil degradation and climate-related issues.<br/><br/>The workshop will address three main scientific challenges: developing comprehensive theoretical models for diverse particle systems, a better understanding of the formation and disintegration of fibrous and other metastructures and a unified approach to evaluate the impact of these factors on large-scale behaviors such as landslides and soil stability. Experts from various disciplines will engage in discussions on themes such as particle interactions at the nanoscale, the physics of granular flows, and the stress transfer mechanisms in soils. Experts will discuss particle interactions, granular flows, and stress transfer in soils through keynote presentations, panel discussions, and brainstorming sessions. A key outcome will be a detailed perspective article outlining new research directions, including the creation of theoretical frameworks and methodologies for monitoring and controlling metastructures. This document will serve as a roadmap for future collaborations and innovations, guiding efforts to develop technologies and methods for better environmental and agricultural practices. By fostering cross-continental partnerships, the workshop will advance scientific knowledge, support education and broadening participation, and contribute to societal welfare through improved soil and environmental health.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Traditional control theorists are concerned with high-level control algorithms and their high-level properties such as convergence, robustness and performance. Notably, they typically assume all calculations are done with real numbers, and do not pay as much attention to the concrete implementation of their control algorithms, or to errors introduced by machine arithmetic. The project's novelties are to bridge the gap between control theory and low-level implementations, and to provide typical control theory guarantees on the implementation rather than on a high-level algorithm. The project's impacts are a comprehensive framework for end-to-end verification of control systems, and applications to the automotive and aerospace domains. This framework encompasses high-level hybrid models down to the verification of embedded C code. The investigators are working closely with several government agencies and industrial partners for technology transfer.<br/><br/>The project is first exploring simple linear discrete-time systems, by designing an end-to-end process achieving verification at all stages, with discrete-time plant semantics. The project is then extending this process to focus on hybrid systems consisting of a continuous-time plant and a discrete-time controller. While typical control engineers work either with pure continuous-time or pure discrete-time models for verification purposes, the actual system combines both paradigms. The project also considers control algorithms that rely on optimization routines, such as model predictive control (MPC). Throughout these tasks, the investigators focus on numerical accuracy using machine arithmetic. One outcome of the project is to provide modular, reusable, open-source formal proofs of end-to-end correctness of common controllers, namely the Proportional?integral?derivative (PID) and MPC controllers. Finally, the project is applying these techniques on three different applications: car collision avoidance, aircraft collision avoidance, and spacecraft docking. The project strives to give research opportunities to students from groups underrepresented in the computing field, through different programs at the University of Michigan and at Ecole Nationale de l'Aviation Civile (ENAC). The project also incorporates findings into control theory and embedded systems college classes, giving students an understanding of the challenges faced when implementing a controller.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Spectroscopic quantum metrologies?the science of using quantum light?matter interactions for measurements?stand at the cutting edge of advancements in high-precision standards, techniques, and applications. Despite representing some of the highest achievements in spectroscopy to date, quantum metrologies have largely remained confined to laboratory settings, leaving their greatest potential??applications outside laboratories??mostly untapped. Following the NSF?s mission to realize practical quantum advantages, the QuPID team, led by the University of Michigan with members from Stanford University, Harvard University, Michigan State University, Ohio State University, University of Arizona, University of Southern California, industry leaders, and national laboratories, is working to remove these barriers. This team is developing groundbreaking chips designed to bring spectroscopic quantum metrologies out of laboratory confines and into the real world while surpassing traditional limits on precision, speed, and efficiency. The resulting scalable technology promises to revolutionize critical industries, ranging from microelectronics and space exploration to healthcare and beyond. These user-friendly, chip-based instruments also streamline education and ignite the imagination of future STEM enthusiasts. By making high-precision quantum measurements accessible and practical, this team is laying the groundwork for a technological renaissance, driving substantial societal progress.<br/><br/>The QuPID team harnesses the collaborative power of the National Quantum Virtual Laboratory to develop the first ultrabroad-band Quantum Photonic Integrated Circuits (Q-PICs) for field-deployable spectroscopic quantum metrologies. By transforming existing quantum-photonic components and innovating new elements, the team creates Quantum Process Design Kits (Q-PDKs) that integrate ultrawide bandgap III?nitride ferroelectric quantum materials with silicon photonics, surpassing traditional limits on precision, speed, and resource usage. These efforts seamlessly combine coherent, attosecond, and quantum spectroscopies to a novel quantum-sensing tool for imaging quantum dynamics within interacting multi-particle systems. In eight years, the team engineers Q-PDKs that tailor quantum-sensing capabilities for diverse industries, making high-precision quantum measurements accessible and practical. Furthermore, the development of these Q-PICs facilitate the creation of compact, robust, and scalable quantum devices, enabling more extensive integration into everyday technologies. The QuPID team is set to transform cumbersome laboratory equipment into streamlined, chip-based solutions, heralding the widespread adoption of quantum advantages.<br/><br/>This project advances the objectives of Quantum Information Science and Engineering at NSF in response to the National Quantum Initiative Act for the continued leadership of the United States in QIS and its technology applications.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. The molecular weights of medicine, biologically-derived drugs, and markers of different malignant diseases are getting larger and larger, from antibodies to packaged nucleic acids, to exosomes and immune cells. The larger size makes these biological structures difficult to analyze with conventional spectroscopic (light interaction-based imaging) and biomedical labeling techniques. However, the complex organization also creates new opportunities to create previously untapped techniques to identify them using recently developed biologically inspired chiral nanostructures of similar complexity, i.e., structures with mirror images of each other but yet cannot be perfectly matched, e.g., one's hands. The scientists from the University of Michigan and the University of Bath will develop rapid and selective identification of antibodies, exosomes, and malignant cells taking advantage of the chiral nanostructures with giant optical activity responsible for high sensitivity. Uniquely strong effects when red light shone on chiral nanostructures generates green light will provide high selectivity. Based on the prior extensive experience of the PIs with middle school outreach, the team will develop an inclusive science curriculum focusing on light and its interactions with matter. The curriculum will also include introduction of simple programming of Arduino chips for light control. The program?s effectiveness will be quantitatively evaluated measuring the engagement and inspiration of middle school children to pursue science and engineering. The comparative outreach results for UK and US middle school children will be analyzed and disseminated.<br/><br/>A team of scientists and engineers from the University of Bath and the University of Michigan will develop a new spectroscopic tool ? CHIROptical second-harmonic light scattering on Nanostructured particles (CHIRON). This spectroscopic tool will spur transformative advances in the data-rich assessment of large biological structures, such as biologically-derived drugs, and markers of different diseases exemplified by antibodies, packaged nucleic acids, liposomes exosomes and immune cells. The formation of biocomplexes between chiral particles and biological structures with multiscale chirality and the drastic enhancement of the second-harmonic effects by non-central symmetry of chiral scatterers enables high-throughput CHIRON analytics based on using single-particle multiplexing and nonlinear parameter analysis.   Importantly, the second harmonic effects have ?giant? intensity for chiral nanostructures due to their asymmetry, size, and polarizability, which enables single particle modality. Using tensorial description of nonlinearity parameters, the team will deconvolute the signal and will thereby provide new biorecognition capabilities. Integration of theory and experiment will enable CHIRON to become a high-throughput, single-particle tool with wide applicability for the detection and analysis of large biomolecules, liposomes, exosomes, etc. To dramatically increase the applicability of the technique across different disciplines, the team will implement a quantum light source with entangled photons.  Label-free methodology of CHIRON analytics will also increase its practicality and accessibility.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Distant quasars observed less than one billion years after the Big Bang are ideal tracers for studying the birth of the earliest supermassive black holes, the assembly of the first massive galaxies, and the buildup of the large-scale structures seen in the early Universe. The PIs will perform a detailed characterization of 25 such quasars by analyzing a legacy multi-wavelength dataset collected from the world's largest telescopes, covering a wavelength range from X-ray to radio. This program will advance our understanding of the growth of the first supermassive black holes, their interactions with quasar host galaxies, and the large-scale structures surrounding them. Additionally, they will collaborate with the Flandrau Science Center & Planetarium at the University of Arizona to develop a "fusion-camp" summer program that will have broad impacts on outreach and education.<br/><br/>Theoretical models predict that the earliest billion supermassive black holes (SMBHs) form in massive galaxies and inhabit massive dark matter halos. The PIs will analyze a suite of multi-wavelength datasets collected from ALMA, VLA, and ground-based optical and infrared telescopes for a sample of 25 quasars in the epoch of reionization. These data, combined with data that is being collected from JWST, Chandra, and HST, will enable the team to resolve the long-standing question of whether the earliest SMBHs reside in the most massive dark matter halos and inhabit emerging large-scale galaxy overdensities. This program will also allow them to study the assembly of quasar host galaxies, understand the connection between AGN feedback and early massive galaxy formation, and constrain cosmic reionization and metal enrichment in the early Universe.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Oceans cover over 70% of the Earth's surface and their ceaseless movement from tides, waves, and currents creates a potentially important energy source that could be an important component of the energy transition for coastal and island communities. Similarly, the constant cycling of onshore and offshore winds over the course of a 24-hour period creates an additional marine related source of green, renewable energy. The Industry-University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC), the Center for Growing Ocean Energy Technologies and the Blue Economy (GO Blue) engages in faculty-driven/industry-relevant, basic, use-inspired research focused on creating new knowledge and innovations of value to industries and start-ups in the marine energy ecosystem. Created by three universities: the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor; the Stevens Institute of Technology; and Texas A&M University at Corpus Christie, this national Center has the potential to address critical problems and issues that are holding the economy back from realizing economically viable electricity coming from marine and coastal marine-related energy sources that generate electricity to feed the national power grid. Broader impacts of the Center include the creation of new knowledge and solving of technical problems and socio-economic issues associated with marine electrical energy generation, close collaboration between university faculty and students and industry, training students in innovation; entrepreneurship; and workforce and workplace safety, and developing new educational programs to build the marine energy workforce of the future. Other impacts include engaging groups underrepresented in science and engineering in marine energy pursuits and public outreach and community engagement around marine energy issues. <br/><br/>The Go Blue Industry-University Cooperative Research Center will harness the expertise of over 30 faculty and researchers from three universities and engage their students and postdocs in basic but industry-need-inspired research. Engineering research in this center will be inherently multidisciplinary spanning the fields of electrical, mechanical, civil, ocean, materials, and environmental engineering.This multi-university collaboration provides expanded access to world-class schools of naval architecture and engineering, state-of-the-art ocean technology test facilities, and computational facilities to Center faculty and students, regardless of home institution, as well as to members of the Center Advisory Board through faculty-initiated research projects of high priority to the marine energy economic sector. The geographical distribution of the three partner universities: The Great Lakes (Michigan), ocean (Stevens Institute), Gulf of Mexico (Texas A&M Corpus Christi), creates a national ensemble that allows the Center to tackle and experiment with new ideas, technology, and energy implementation scenarios in vastly different marine/coastal/large freshwater lake environments and settings. Center research ideas come from faculty who listen to the needs of the marine energy economic sector, as represented by dues-paying members of the Center Advisory Board. Faculty research is funded by pooled Advisory Board membership fees for projects of high priority to the sector, as indicated by the collective members of the Center Advisory Board. Center research thrusts are marine energy technology for renewable energy production, powering the blue economy which includes power generation and marine transport, and marine energy societal acceptance; economic viability; and environmental sustainability.<br/><br/>This award is co-funded by the Division of Engineering Education and Centers in the Directorate for Engineering, and the Division of Research, Innovation, Synergies, and Education in the Directorate for Geosciences<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This project aims to serve the national interest by working to shift the narrative nationally in engineering education from surviving in a culture of stress to a narrative of thriving. Higher education is facing a mental health crisis, with increasing rates of mental health and well-being (MHWB) challenges both nationally and globally. This change towards a culture of thriving in engineering is particularly important because MHWB impacts every aspect of engineering culture. Most approaches to support MHWB use faculty training in recognizing students in distress, which is a deficit approach instead of a proactive, asset-based approach. This Level 2 Institutional and Community Transformation project is designed to build on an existing community of practice that includes over 100 people, including faculty, staff, graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and university administrators. This group empowers members to discuss MHWB in engineering and share strategies to support student, faculty, and staff MHWB. Strengthening and expanding this community will have an asset focus on how to promote and celebrate well-being, normalizing these conversations in engineering education. This project has the potential to directly support the MHWB of students, faculty, staff, and administrators in engineering education.<br/><br/>The main research question is: How can faculty, staff, and administrators act as agents of change for cultures of well-being in undergraduate engineering education? The design consists of (1) a programmatic expansion of the Wellness in Engineering Community of Transformation (WE-CoT) with well-being advocate mini-grants to support the integration and assessment of MHWB interventions as well as (2) qualitative research that assesses the experience and advocacy development of participants via focus groups, interviews, and photovoice, a method centering members? voices. The programmatic expansion plans to include a monthly meeting series and development of a sustainable community structure.  The project includes support for development of a MHWB intervention, assessment plan, and data analysis for mini-grant recipients. Each project will receive mentorship support with experts in educational research methods and/or intervention development and counseling. This programmatic expansion is positioned to support the continuation of MHWB workshops for engineering faculty, staff, and administrators nationally. The project plans to utilize a qualitative research design focused on centering the voice of engineering faculty, staff, and administrators to answer the research questions. These will consist of photovoice interviews and focus groups with both members in the WE-CoT and also with non-community students, faculty, staff, and administrators who are engaged in engineering education. If successful, the results from this research will inform WE-CoT initiatives to increase the effectiveness of the community in supporting change agents around mental health in engineering. Research results will be disseminated in scholarly publications as well as through WE-CoT monthly meetings and conference MHWB workshops. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This Growing Convergence Research project brings together researchers from engineering, physics, geo- and materials sciences with the goal of establishing a convergence framework to address the feasibility of mineral detection (MD) of dark matter. There is overwhelming evidence from astrophysics and cosmology that there is about five times as much dark matter as there is ordinary matter, i.e. the stuff we are made of. In MD, one studies geological samples of gram- to kilogram-scale, which have been exposed to dark matter interactions for billions of years. This allows MD to have the potential to match or exceed the sensitivity of conventional experiments. MD may therefore provide a path to answering the question of what dark matter actually is.<br/><br/>In MD, the interactions of crystals with dark matter results in permanent changes to the crystal lattice which can be measured much later than the original interaction. This long intervening time combined with the geological changes the samples have encountered is a challenge for the interpretation of dark matter signals in MD. The changes to the crystal lattice are happening at the nano-scale and thus methods which can record nano-scale features scattered over a large, cubic millimeter to cubic centimeter, volume are required. This also implies a challenge in terms of data volumes and subsequent analysis. In addition, a dedicated simulation effort, from particle transport to molecular dynamics, is required to gain a theoretical understanding of damage formation and permanence.  This project will test the feasibility of the MD approach to detecting interactions between ordinary and dark matter.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the educational experience of undergraduate engineering students through the development of wellness-focused curricular resources. Studies of engineering students reveal engineering education to be a high-stress environment that hinders retention, persistence, and learning. It is important to understand how wellness interventions can engage and benefit engineering students. The overall goal of this project is to change the narrative from "surviving" engineering education to "thriving" in it by providing students with research-based tools and strategies to support their wellness. The project team will develop a novel course and related curricular resources designed for adaptation at other institutions and across STEM disciplines. These resources, including lessons, workbooks, and workshops, will support instructors who may not have the time or expertise to develop wellness curricula themselves. A more inclusive and empowering engineering curriculum should enhance persistence and diversity in engineering. A thriving mindset built on wellness will also lead to a better-prepared engineering workforce and engineers who are better-equipped for the complexity of professional practice. Increasing engineering students' wellness will also improve the public's views of engineering as a profession that desires a diverse and thriving U.S. engineering workforce.<br/><br/>The investigators aim to identify strategies and implement interventions in first-year engineering curricula that will support engineering students' thriving and wellness. This effort will involve an integrated research and educational approach to investigating wellness and developing instructional resources. Guided by social cognitive theory as a theoretical framework, the research findings will inform content and delivery of curriculum to support students' wellness and lead to the creation of resources for faculty. Knowledge gains from interviews of engineering students (qualitative data) will enable insights into the opportunities and barriers that students face, as well as how they engage with wellness practices.  Knowledge gains from interviews of engineering faculty (qualitative data) will enable insights into best practices to support faculty in adopting wellness education in their classrooms. The results will inform the development of a course and other curricular resources that will be shared broadly for wider adoption. Undergraduate student researchers will be trained in education research methods, and they will support the development of curricula and resources.<br/><br/>The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Rehab for America: Housing Resilience for Detroit Communities addresses the nation?s acute housing crisis through the rehabilitation of vacant homes. Potential homebuyers are being priced-out of even the most affordably built new housing. Yet, in many communities, unoccupied, salvageable structures are ready to be converted to viable housing. Through Rehab for America, University of Michigan researchers will work with the Detroit Land Bank Authority (DLBA), Community Development Advocates of Detroit (CDAD), and aspiring home purchasers/rehabbers to make the rehabilitation process more attainable. Using innovative construction methods and materials, toolkits and training, and funding sources, homeowners will be empowered to conduct repairs and/or work more effectively with contractors, tapping the wealth of DLBA structures (currently 6841), contributing solutions that are expeditious, equitable, and resilient. Our vision is to increase homeownership for Detroit residents by making rehab construction affordable and homes more sustainable so they?re cheaper to heat, cool, and maintain in the service of increasing mental and physical well-being, household wealth, and neighborhood property values.<br/><br/>Rehab for America addresses an important component of the nation?s housing affordability crisis by creating resources for and efficiencies in the process of rehabilitating vacant homes in America?s post-industrial cities. It envisions new service design; construction materials, methods, and efficiencies; and recommendations for financing to improve the success of homeowners and nonprofit developers purchasing and rehabilitating DLBA held properties. We aim to lower the barriers to structural rehabilitation through a three-pronged approach: the development of a better communication strategy and servicing by the DLBA, the creation of tactical approaches to aid in construction, and identification of funding models. The team of architects, engineers, and planners will partner with the DLBA to develop more robust forms of communication with buyers and nonprofit developers about rehabilitating properties. Working with the non-profit Community Development Advocates of Detroit (CDAD) we will engage community partners to identify new or underutilized funding sources to offset the cost of home repair. During the pilot project (Stage 2) we will rehab a DLBA property creating models and demonstrations for best practices. The goals to be assessed during the project include: lowered energy costs through life-cycle building performance and long-term maintenance through material and method specification; increased home value; rebuilding of community; better health outcomes; increased trust among stakeholders, and job training. Piloting the project in Detroit, the service design and products will be modeled for applicability to communities across the United States.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This project transforms engineering education by leveraging "meaningful failure" as a promising approach to learning and teaching. Failure is an inherent part of human life and learning processes, and early failure is often prerequisite step on the path to successful learning. However, typical engineering education currently punishes failure, which disincentivizes innovation, exploration, and risk-taking, ultimately resulting in engineers who are less prepared to tackle complex global challenges. By understanding students? unique experiences during moments of academic failure, this project supports students taking risks and learning from setbacks, developing the skills and mindsets to embrace failure as a meaningful experience in their learning. Our research involves the use of biometric data, observations of classroom dynamics, and psychosocial assessments to better understand how each student experiences failure on a physiological, cognitive, and social level. We will use these data to develop new educational tools and strategies that will provide immediate, tailored interventions connected to individual student needs and experiences. This research will support the development of a workforce ready to persist past ubiquitous failure experiences in engineering to address tomorrow?s challenging engineering problems. Further, this research aligns with the goal of creating inclusive and equitable learning environments that can adapt to the diverse needs of all students.<br/><br/>The project will explore meaningful failure in engineering education contexts by developing personalized learning strategies and pedagogical tools. The proposed research has three goals: identifying real-time failure profile signals, understanding how learners' responses to failure are individualized, and determining necessary changes in pedagogy and assessment to support personalized responses tolearning from failure. The research involves a multi-pronged data collection approach, including laboratory experiments using video and biosensing modalities (EEG, EDA, ECG), classroom observations, surveys, and interviews with educators and administrators. A convergent team from five institutions, with expertise in cognitive neuroscience, learning sciences, AI, and psychosocial theories of learning and development collaborate to create individualized failure profiles. These profiles will integrate multi-modal data sources to formally represent each learner?s unique cognitive, affective, and behavioral responses to failure. The project will culminate in the development of pedagogical tools and strategies to support personalized learning and resilience ? increasing retention and success rates in engineering fields and pioneering a shift in engineering education towards valuing learning from failure.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. A nontechnical description:<br/>Society is experiencing a widening gap between artificial intelligence (AI) demand and computing hardware capabilities, which must already catch up with Moore's Law. This immense hunger for computing power is driven by continuous advancements in computing hardware, which now faces the constraint of interconnect inefficiency, exemplified by the infamous ?Memory Wall.? Under the Future of Semiconductor 2 program, this project proposes a highly integrated photonic chip solution to enable ultra-high bandwidth, energy-efficient data transmission between computing nodes. The approach incorporates multiple innovative advancements across materials, devices, integration, architecture, and network topology. This collaborative research, conducted by three leading universities in partnership with four industrial IT companies and a national lab, aims to achieve a significant leap in performance metrics over current state-of-the-art technologies. The broader impacts of the proposed research, driven by a mixture of academic and industrial veterans, also include expediting tech-to-market transfer and nurturing next-generation minds with a real-world perspective, co-designed execution flow, and practical know-how build-up. The effort ensures a holistic approach to education and innovation. Participated student researchers will heavily benefit from and further propel various regional and national semiconductor training and research programs.<br/><br/>A technical description:<br/>The project aims to develop a novel system-in-package technology with a heterogeneous multi-functional in-package photonic platform/interposer, accommodating CPUs, TPU, or GPU (collectively, Processing Units (PU)) chips, high-bandwidth memory (HBM) stacks, and accelerator/ASIC chips, etc. Each PU and HBM chip is intimately integrated with a heterogeneous optical transceiver, composed of ultra-compact high-speed modulators and photodetectors, which provide up to 400 Gb/s/lane communication bandwidth. Arrays of 200-400 Gb/s heterogeneous modulators support a record-large 9.6-19.2 Tb/s total communication bandwidth for each PU chip. Moreover, the project will develop on-chip lithography-free photonic routing circuits and heterogeneously integrated waveguide-free optical switches with optical gain to enable reconfigurable on- and off-chip optical switching networks that can be dynamically programmed to realize various network topologies for different AI algorithms. The hardware platform will be developed with seamless co-design of materials, devices, fabrication, system, architecture, and network topology and benchmarked with an automatic network mapping framework.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Understanding the dynamics of radiation belt electrons is critical for our ability to predict the effects of solar storms on the near-Earth space environment and our upper atmosphere. In the radiation belts, these electrons can pose problems for satellite operations. Plasma waves direct these electrons into our atmosphere, where they can influence upper atmospheric chemistry and dynamics. This project will incorporate methods from the weather and climate fields (stochastic parameterization and ensemble modeling) to better model and predict the result of these wave-particle interactions. This project will expose the broader space physics community to these compelling tools from the weather and climate fields. This project will support a first-time early career PI.<br/><br/>Lightning-generated whistlers (LGWs) are one of the primary drivers of radiation belt electron precipitation within the plasmasphere. The primary objective of this project is to study the interaction of LGWs with radiation belt electrons using event-specific diffusion coefficients to more accurately capture the rate of pitch angle scattering and precipitation into the Earth?s atmosphere for eventual implementation into a stochastically parameterized diffusion model. Stochastic parameterization is a modeling scheme where the variables representing the sub grid physics (i.e., diffusion coefficients representing wave-particle interactions) are selected randomly from a distribution instead of using a deterministic average. This allows for explicit variance of the sub-grid physics and better error quantification through ensemble modeling. Quantifying and understanding the temporal and spatial scale sizes of the variability of each wave mode is a crucial first step in implementing a complete stochastically parameterized radiation belt diffusion model. This project seeks to accomplish this for LGWs, an important wave mode inside the plasmasphere.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Students are typically taught to derive equational proofs by hand, with little or no direct feedback or mechanical assistance during the process. The project?s novelties are the development of a customizable classroom proof assistant, called the Hazel Prover, that provides classroom-appropriate automated assistance and feedback to students as they derive equational proofs. The project?s impacts are the development, deployment, and evaluation of customized instances of the Hazel Prover into a representative sample of courses offered at all levels in the College of Engineering at the University of Michigan that collectively enroll several thousand students per year. With the aid of these tools, students benefit from a much tighter and more accurate feedback loop, improving learning. The technology and course material, which are made broadly available to researchers and instructors, advance the fields of educational technology and automated theorem prover design.<br/><br/>The project addresses several challenges that have limited the impact of existing proof assistants in the classroom. In particular, modern proof assistants (1) present an excessively steep learning curve, particularly in courses where programming is not a prerequisite, (2) require shifting from conventional and domain-specific mathematical notation to textual programming notation, (3) are intolerant of errors, unlike human graders, and (4) are distractingly pedantic, requiring users to satisfy proof obligations that humans typically elide. The proposed research refines and deploys a customizable classroom proof assistant, the Hazel Prover, that solves or can be customized to solve each of these problems. The Hazel Prover builds incrementally on the recent work by the investigator on the Hazel educational programming environment, including promising preliminary work on the Hazel Stepper tool that has already been deployed successfully into the classroom. The system interfaces with the Coq theorem prover and existing math proof libraries, while only exposing students to structured easy-to-use proof construction affordances.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. The project seeks to design, develop, and deploy Artificial Intelligence (AI) responsibly. Rapid technological growth has often overlooked the importance of community input. To address this, this project uses an approach that recognizes community members as experts with valuable insights. The project uses human-computer interaction to change how communities are involved in developing AI. The project will explore these changes and develop new ways to include community voices in AI design.  This project will foster AI application and methodological advancements through established community-based partnerships. Focus areas include public health, education, and work. Investigating how AI impacts these areas will help solve important social problems. It will also improve research on responsible technology development.<br/><br/>Using methodologies such as Community-Based Participatory Research and participatory design, this research focuses on residents of the east side of Detroit to investigate community members? priorities for Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies. This project also employs educational sessions, reflective surveys, and the innovative Choosing All Together (CHAT) deliberative tool to co-create planning processes with academic researchers and community members that account for technological advances and societal impacts. In collaboration with community members, the project will investigate how to use Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT. It will uncover their benefits as well as potential harms while focusing on applications pertinent to the context. The objectives are to: (1) Establish a baseline understanding of AI, its current use, and its impact on communities; (2) Shift towards more responsible, community-focused research and development in AI; (3) Identify and prioritize the most critical areas for future investigation; and (4) Move toward responsible AI integration within community-engaged research.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Green Era Educational NFP (Green Era) and the University of Michigan are working together in partnership to transform the landscape of waste management by fostering community resilience and social equity through the innovative use of bioenergy solutions. Green Era has developed a 9-acre vacant brownfield lot in the South Side of Chicago into a vibrant campus, hosting a renewable energy biodigester facility that uses food waste for operation and hub for urban agriculture and green jobs. Together, we envision a Research-Centered Pilot Project that will focus on optimizing their technological processes, engaging with their local communities, and developing educational materials to strengthen and amplify their positive community impact now and in the future. The work proposed will take a community-centric approach and contribute to broader positive impacts in the local community and beyond, such as increased economic opportunities, offset carbon, and support for healthier lifestyles. The outcomes of this work can be used to empower other communities and support economic and environmental prosperity, as well as community resilience. <br/><br/>In the planning scope of this project, we are motivated by the following research questions: 1) How might we characterize food waste streams and design an optimal blend of food waste sources as the substrate for biodigestion operation for Green Era? and 2) What are community priorities related to Green Era?s bioenergy operations and how do their priorities align or conflict with Green Era?s current processes? To answer these questions, we plan to run two workshops at Green Era?s campus to conduct technical analysis and community mapping to gather information and deepen our collective understanding. This information gathering will include community consultations, which will include semi-structured interviews with identified community partners, and technical feasibility studies, which will include laboratory characterizations of food waste and process optimization trials. Ultimately, the goal of the planning phase is to co-develop a strategic plan for Green Era based on our sociotechnical learnings that will be implemented in the project's next phase.<br/><br/>This project is in response to the Civic Innovation Challenge program?s Track A. Climate and Environmental Instability - Building Resilient Communities through Co-Design, Adaption, and Mitigation and is a collaboration between NSF, the Department of Homeland Security, and the Department of Energy.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Data uncertainty is ubiquitous in several algorithmic applications such as healthcare, retail, transportation and robotics. For example, medical diagnosis involves performing tests without precise knowledge of the underlying condition, capacity planning in the retail industry involves coming up with inventory levels without full knowledge of future demand, and path planning in robotics involves finding routes with limited information about the ambient space. In these and many other applications, one needs to design algorithms using only partial input information (typically obtained from historical data). This project aims to design algorithms with theoretical performance guarantees for some fundamental problems arising in these applications.  Results from this project will contribute to and establish new connections between theoretical computer science, operations research, and machine learning.  The project also involves mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, developing new course material, and organizing workshops to broaden participation in graduate programs.<br/><br/>This project models uncertainty using stochastic optimization, where unknown input parameters are treated as random variables. Algorithms for such problems are often very sequential, where each step makes some decision and observes a corresponding random variable. The first goal in this project is to obtain parallelizable algorithms for stochastic optimization, which corresponds to making decisions in a small number of sequential rounds. This research direction involves quantifying the tradeoff between approximation quality (relative to the optimal sequential solution) and the number of sequential rounds. The second goal in this project is to obtain algorithms for stochastic optimization when the probability distribution of the input is unknown. This research direction is motivated by applications where historical data is inaccurate or unavailable. This direction will utilize and combine techniques from approximation algorithms and online learning. The project will address both these research directions in the context of fundamental combinatorial optimization problems such as knapsack, set cover, and influence maximization.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. The proposed research-centered pilot will support the deployment of data-driven analytics to improve the efficiency, access, sustainability, and equity of the largest community carshare service in the nation and the development of fundamental knowledge about the science and engineering of community carshare. In 2022, the cities of Saint Paul and Minneapolis, Minnesota launched the EV Spot Network in collaboration with HOURCAR, the largest nonprofit carshare provider in the US. The EV Spot Network provides publicly owned electric vehicle (EV) carshare and chargers. The vehicles and chargers are owned by the cities, while HOURCAR operates the service. The system was designed from inception to serve those with the greatest transportation need, with at least half of serviced neighborhoods designated as disadvantaged. The service is planned to grow significantly over the next three years with up to 200 additional EVs to be added in 2025 (and potentially more in subsequent years). Planned growth will allow for expanding the service region, extending the reach of public transit and making cars more available. If successful, the pilot can serve as a template for how community carshare can be scaled up in a cost-effective way while increasing access, reducing environmental footprint, and improving equity.<br/><br/>This scale-up poses challenges that have not been adequately addressed previously in the academic literature or practice and thus provides a unique opportunity to conduct a research-oriented pilot project. The proposed research-centered pilot will deploy data-driven analytics, developed by the research team, to support HOURCAR in making decisions as it seeks to densify of its service, expand its service region, and extend the reach of public transit. Specifically, we envision working with HOURCAR and its stakeholders, to develop and deploy AI based decision support tools for demand estimation, design of the system network, pricing and incentive design, and overall system management and planning.  The research will also test the effectiveness of various behavioral modification interventions and incentives that can promote the use of carsharing and enhance the body of social science research on this topic.   The approach developed here will demonstrate how community carshare can be scaled up in a cost-effective way while increasing access, reducing environmental footprint, and improving equity. It can also serve as a blueprint for how cities, transit authorities, and community-based organizations can partner to bridge the gap between essential resources and services and community needs.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. This project is a planning workshop that will kick off an Advocacy Building Campaign for Engineering Education Research (ABC for EER) to promote the recognition and support of EER by universities and colleges nationwide. The ABC for EER seeks to address the problems facing the field of EER in gaining widespread acceptance and support within academia as a valued field of study. The field of EER includes educators and researchers with experience in the practices of both engineering and teaching and with expertise in education research, psychology, and social sciences. EER focuses on complex problems such as recruiting students in engineering with diverse perspectives and backgrounds, embracing new technologies and approaches to teaching engineering, and preparing diverse types of engineering students for the global challenges they will face as practicing engineers and leaders. Research by EER scholars provides evidence and knowledge to help universities and colleges address these complex problems; yet their work is often dismissed by administrators and faculty in engineering programs at universities and colleges as not being robust or relevant. This project aims to start the process of advocating for EER through a targeted campaign that will clearly articulate the value of EER to scholars outside the field, to leaders in higher education, and to policymakers who make decisions that affect higher education. This project aligns with the focus of the Engineering Education and Centers Division to promote research that creates and supports an innovative and inclusive technical workforce for the future, particularly in terms of understanding systemic and structural changes in engineering education programs, departments and colleges.<br/><br/>This planning workshop for the Advocacy Building Campaign for Engineering Education Research (ABC for EER) aims to address the challenges facing the field of EER, which can be characterized as a disconnect between the tangible benefits and impact of EER and the metrics typically prioritized by engineering programs, colleges and universities. These challenges often result in a lack of institutional support and recognition for EER scholars, they hinder the career advancement of EER scholars and the growth of EER as a discipline, and they limit the integration of innovative educational practices within higher education. The planning workshop will convene EER scholars, stakeholders and leaders at different levels of power and influence in higher education, policymaking, advocacy, and legislation. It will be conducted as a series of three sessions structured to build trust, foster collaboration, outline critical paths for implementation, and establish evaluation metrics to assess the success of the ABC for EER. Interim steps between workshop sessions are proposed to synthesize, communicate, and gather feedback on the planning process at different time points. The workshop sessions will be guided by elements of campaign strategy to identify and articulate the value of EER to a broad audience both within and outside of academia, develop a strategic communication plan, and lay out actionable objectives for promoting EER within the higher education community. The two anticipated outcomes of this workshop series are: (1) a list of key stakeholders in the EER ecosystem to participate in the future, ongoing ABC for EER, and (2) a plan for a series of activities to successfully conduct the ABC for EER as an advocacy campaign.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Liquid metals are fertile platforms for inorganic materials synthesis and design. Recently, room temperature liquid metals have proven uniquely suited for the electrochemical syntheses of novel nanomaterials, new compositions of matter, and potent (electro)catalysts. A critical factor in expanding the palette of materials chemistry possible with liquid metals is a clearer understanding of the structure of the interface with molecular solutions. With support from the Division of Chemistry at NSF and DFG, Dr. Maldonado at U Michigan, Dr. Ocko at Brookhaven National Lab in US and Dr. Magnussen at Kiel University in Germany will work together to define the microscopic details of the evolution of the liquid/liquid interface between metallic gallium (Ga) and water during electrochemical reactions. The successful completion of the proposed work will lead to the development of supported electrode platforms that enable smooth, thin liquid metal films that are amenable for more precise operando and electrocatalytic studies and that are applicable to any liquid metal composition. The students involved in the research project will have the opportunity to enhance students exposure to global research and practices.<br/><br/>This work will advance the fundamental understanding of liquid metal/liquid electrolyte behaviors on two distinct fronts. First, the electrodeposition of various metals cations onto liquid Ga electrodes will be performed to examine the physicochemical and electrochemical factors at the interface relevant to observing quasi-epitaxial crystal growth. The atomistic details of quasi-epitaxy will be unraveled by operando X-ray reflectivity and grazing incidence X-ray diffraction. As an important prerequisite for these studies, the team will investigate the interface structure of liquid Ga in metal-free aqueous base electrolyte as a function of potential and pH, focusing in particular on the presence and structure of Ga surface oxide layers. Second, the formation and activity of supported catalytically active liquid metal platforms based on Ga will be studied. The interplay of the interface structure of the liquid metal interfacial structure and the distribution and dynamics of isolated catalytic solute atoms will be determined for the case of hydrogen evolution and electrochemical CO2 reduction.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research that strengthens America?s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity, protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and decision-making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and society and builds on advances in technology and engineering.<br/><br/>Microbusinesses, those with less than 10 employees, make up 92% of U.S. businesses and are an economic lifeline, particularly for people of color. Microbusinesses generate 41.3 million jobs and $5 trillion in economic impact. Yet, learning to use digital technologies, such as online ads and point-of-sale systems, is one of their top challenges. The widening gap in digital engagement between under-resourced microbusinesses and higher-resourced larger businesses has long-term implications for profitability and community development. Despite the nation's major investments in broadband development, building digital capacity among microbusinesses will require more than just providing broadband access -- it will also involve additional infrastructure to facilitate adoption and sustained use. This project brings together a diverse team of researchers from Human-Computer Interaction, Social Work, and Computer Science to propose the Community Tech Workers model as a form of infrastructure for supporting under-resourced microbusinesses' digital capacity. <br/><br/>The Community Tech Workers (CTW) model is inspired by the validated Community Health Worker model. It employs and trains local residents to provide 1:1 support for increasing community members' confidence and autonomy with using digital technologies. The goals of this project are three-fold: (1) Create a taxonomy of barriers and supports to equitable participation in using digital technologies among under-resourced microbusiness owners; (2) Develop culturally relevant workforce training for cultural competency skills in technology jobs; and (3) Produce a conceptual model outlining factors that might impact a community's potential to adopt the CTW program. Traditional technology adoption models often use a deficiency-based approach by highlighting the problems of those receiving services, thus setting up communities to rely on long-term external help. CTWs promote a more sustainable model of digital capacity building that leverages community assets. Outcomes of this research include a more scalable and cost-effective CTW model for under-resourced communities to adopt and implement on their own.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. 