This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying barriers facing Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) scholars, particularly those of color, in the successful creation and implementation of sponsored research funded activities. Two hybrid-delivered conferences will be held during the course of the project. Faculty and staff from open access two-year colleges, broad access four-year universities, Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), and other Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) will be invited to attend each conference. To ensure attendance by as broad an audience as possible, participants can select to attend virtually or face to face. Though other conferences have focused on providing information to faculty on how to write a competitive grant proposal, this conference is taking a more enriched approach. During the conference meetings faculty and staff will discuss potential barriers that exist within their institutions or their institutional systems that, if addressed, could improve successful grant writing and project implementation. Attendees at varying career levels and institutional types in STEM undergraduate education will be brought together to form a network of scholars focused on sharing best practices with regard to being successful in securing external funding. Model programs that have resulted in sustainable change at the institutional level will also be shared.<br/><br/>This project is building upon work through the Institute for the Contemporary African American Experience, an initiative at Cheyney University, a state HBCU in Pennsylvania. It is a well-documented phenomenon that though the number of people of color receiving STEM degrees of all levels (baccalaureate, masters, and doctorate) is increasing, the number of people of color in STEM who receive external support is decreasing. This conference seeks to better understand and address this phenomenon in several ways. First is to have participants engage in Racial Healing Circles for the purpose of identifying potential barriers, particularly for people of color, in securing sponsored research funds. Second is to create an authentic network of individuals dedicated to research and development in STEM education for the purpose of collaboration, mentoring, and increased understanding related to securing external research support. And third is to identify and share sustainable approaches to decreasing barriers and increasing support, particularly for people of color with regard to seeking and obtaining sponsored research funding. Targeted evaluation will occur with conference participants for the purpose of better understanding how activities like Racial Healing Circles, Mock Panels, Interactive Panels of Peers, and other activities can identify and address racial equity barriers and solutions. The findings will be disseminated to all attendees and their institutions through two follow-up virtual presentations, through targeted conference presentations, and publication of findings. Funding for this project is provided by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program which supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary communities.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program provides support to design, implement, study and assess efforts to increase the numbers of students and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This project at Cheyney University of Pennsylvania provides a strategic approach to recruiting and retaining computer science undergraduates by involving them in research projects that lead to curriculum enhancements in undergraduate courses. <br/><br/>This one-year pilot project seeks to create a set of research tools and projects to involve undergraduate students in computer science related research, expose them to learning activities outside of the classroom, and subsequently capture learning objectives and develop learning modules to be incorporated into undergraduate computer science courses.  The students will conduct research at the home campus, as well as on the campus of Drexel University. The project is guided by formative and summative evaluation.<br/><br/>This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria. Cheyney Universitys implementation project entitled - Building Excellence and Access through Research (BEAR) - has the goal to increase the recruitment, retention, and graduation of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) students, as well as increase their admission rate to STEM graduate programs or to the STEM workforce. This goal will be attained through three interrelated activities: curriculum development and instrumentation, faculty development, and student development.  The project is based on the lessons learned from the previous HBCU-UP implementation project, interventions and strategies adapted from best practices described in the literature, formative and outcome-based evaluation results, and the overall mission and priorities of the University.<br/><br/>The expected project outcomes include: increased STEM student graduation rates; increased use of technology in teaching and research by STEM faculty; strengthened relationships and partnerships with other academic institutions and industry partners; increased faculty participation in research, grant writing and other scholarly activities; enhanced quality of undergraduate research experiences; and increased numbers of students going to graduate school. Abstract 0811628<br/><br/>Cheyney University of Pennsylvania is implementing Inquiry-Discovery based instruction throughout the chemistry and biology curricula. Most importantly, the incorporation of research equipment ?- an Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS), a High Performance Liquid Chromatograph (HPLC), a Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer (GC-MS) and a microwave-assisted synthesis device (the Discover Lab Mate) -- completes our inventory of equipment needed to fulfill the requirements by the American Chemical Society (ACS) for an approved and accredited chemistry program. A strong Inquiry-Discovery based curricula in chemistry and biology, coupled with an ACS approved chemistry program, provides a good recruitment tool for the Science and Allied Health department, while helping to train current students in the use of modern instrumentation needed for a competitive edge in the workforce and in graduate school. Further, faculty research capabilities are enhanced, leading to more valuable contributions by the faculty with its collaborative partners, both local and regional industries, as well as other academic departments located throughout Pennsylvania.<br/> Cheyney University of Pennsylvania will implement a five-year aggressive project called Building Engagement and Attainment in Mathematics and the Sciences (BEAMS).  The overall goal of the Cheyney University BEAMS project is to increase the number of underrepresented minority students graduating from Cheyney with baccalaureate degrees and pursuing graduate studies in STEM disciplines.  <br/><br/>This five-year project will focus on curriculum enhancement, pre-freshman preparation, student and faculty research and graduate school examination preparation to address the low graduation rates of underrepresented minority students from STEM disciplines.  These activities have been shown to significantly increase success rates of students in the STEM disciplines.<br/><br/>The BEAMS project will support several workshop opportunities for faculty addressing current pedagogical approaches such as constructivism, and inquiry/discovery-based teaching.  Several STEM courses will be revised to make them more research and laboratory oriented.  Additionally, , a pre-freshmen summer program, student symposia, seminars, workshops, research opportunities, and GRE preparation will be provided.  BEAMS at Cheyney University will provide a rich undergraduate education experience, which will result in an overall increase in the success rate of STEM majors. <br/><br/>Intellectual merit:  The project will implement activities that have been shown to improve student success in STEM including a pre-freshman summer program, pedagogy training for faculty, undergraduate research opportunities, increased faculty research support, and curriculum enhancement.<br/> <br/>Broader impact:  The project will increase the number of underrepresented minority students who pursue STEM degrees and the number prepared for and enrolling in STEM graduate programs.<br/><br/> 